--- PAGE 1 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N
ZEMYNA KULIKAUSKAITE, Trinity College Dublin
SHEENA O?REILLY,Trinity College Dublin
THOMAS MORONEY, Trinity College Dublin
YONGJIA LI, Trinity College Dublin
WEN GENG LIN, Trinity College Dublin
1 INTRODUCTION
This report presents the design and implementation of a distributed
multiplayer Pac-Man game, that runs on a localhost web browser.
The game uses technologies such as WebSockets, Redis, and Mon-
goDB to provide a seamless multiplayer experience, ensuring real-
time state synchronisation across multiple devices. The system?s
architecture supports scalability, fault tolerance, and performance
optimisation, allowing players to connect and interact in a dynamic
and persistent maze environment. The report outlines the functional
and non-functional requirements, technical specifications, system
architecture, implementation details, and testing.
2 REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Service Description
The application is a multiplayer Pac-Man game designed to be played
across multiple devices. Our distributed system is currently sim-
ulated locally using Docker containers, with players joining via
separate browser instances. All players share the same maze envi-
ronment, interacting with the same ghosts and collecting the same
dots.
The game features an endless maze mechanic, when a player exits
through a door, they are transported into a new maze instance,
allowing continuous gameplay. The system is distributed across
multiple servers, with Redis used to maintain consistency of game
state across instances.
A scoreboard tracks individual player scores in real-time, which
is managed using a central MongoDB database. This architecture
allows the game to scale to multiple users while preserving state
synchronisation and score accuracy across all clients.
2.2 Functional Requirements
The functional requirements section defines the system?s specific
features and behaviour.
? Player Requirements
? Players can join the game through individual browser
instances.
? Each player can see other active players that are in the
same maze in real time, even if they are connected to a
different server.
? Player and ghost movements are synchronised across
all connected clients.
? Dot positions are consistent and synchronised for all
players.
? Ghosts interact consistently with all players, regardless
of client.
? If multiple players collide with the same ghost simulta-
neously, all involved players are considered dead.
? Players can collect dots and accumulate points.
? Players have three lives that decrease when colliding
with ghosts.
? Players can eat power ups and eat ghosts.
? Players have three lives and then they are presented
with a game over screen.
? Maze Requirements
? When a player exits through a door, they are transi-
tioned into a new maze.
? Each maze has a unique visual texture, allowing players
to identify when they have entered a different maze.
? Ghost and Dropper Requirements
? Ghosts remain confined to the maze in which they orig-
inally spawned.
? When a ghost is eaten, it respawns after a short delay.
? Ghosts respawn with one less life if eaten, they do not
respawn if they run out of lives, if all the ghosts die, all
4 respawn.
? Droppers move randomly and dynamically place dots
in areas where none currently exists.
? Additional Requirements
? A scoreboard displays the top 10 players with the high-
est scores.
? The scoreboard updates in real time as scores change.
? The server and maze instance associated with a player
is visibly displayed to them.
? The number of players currently present in the same
maze is shown to each player.
? Servers dynamically multiply to handle load.
2.3 Non-Functional Requirements
The non-functional requirements define how a system performs a
function rather than what functions it performs. They describe the
quality, performance, and constraints of the system.
? Scalability
? The system supports multiple game server instances,
each running on a separate port.
? Load balancing is implemented to distribute player con-
nections across server instances.
? We use sharding to dynamically assigned mazes to
servers based on player distribution.
--- PAGE 2 ---
2 ?
? Additional server instances can be added without re-
quiring code modifications.
? The system is deployed in a regional architecture, with
one server cluster per region (e.g., EU, Asia). Each clus-
ter has its own Redis database instance and we use
replication to synchronise state across regions.
? Performance
? Ghost movement updates are optimised to occur 20
times per second.
? Real-time communication is handled via a WebSocket
protocol that transmits only essential data.
? Network latency is minimized through movement in-
terpolation on the client side.
? Static assets such as images and map files are cached
to reduce loading times and bandwidth consumption.
? Availability
? If a player?s connection to a server is lost, their current
state (position, direction, etc.) is preserved.
? The client automatically attempts to reconnect to the
next available server instance within the same region.
? On reconnection, the player?s game state is synchro-
nised with the game server to maintain continuity.
? Data Management
? Redis: Used for real-time game state management across
servers. It tracks transient data including player posi-
tions, ghost positions, dropper activity, consumed dots,
maze metadata, and power dots. Expiry times are set
for certain keys (e.g., 1 hour for players, 24 hours for
dots) to manage memory usage.
? MongoDB: Used for long-term storage of persistent
data such as player scores, game history, and static
configuration data. MongoDB ensures data durability
and historical recordkeeping beyond individual game
sessions.
3 SPECIFICATION
3.1 System Overview
The system is a distributed multiplayer Pac-Man game designed
to run on web browsers. Players connect to game servers via Web-
Socket, enabling real-time communication for player actions and
game state synchronisation. Redis is used for managing real-time
game data, such as player positions, ghost states, and maze up-
dates. MongoDB handles persistent storage, including player scores,
profiles, and game history.
3.2 Components
Description of the key components:
? Client: Is responsible for rendering the game and managing
player interactions in real time. It handles the display of
various game components, such as the maze layout, player
positions, and ghosts. The client also ensures synchronisa-
tion with the server by managing WebSocket connections
and coordinating multiplayer interactions. Additionally, the
client dynamically updates the leaderboard and tracks player
actions, like movement and consumption of dots.
? Backend: Is responsible for game state synchronisation,
persistent storage, player connections, Websocket connec-
tions, Redis integration, and MongoDB for storage. Three
Docker-based servers manage player requests and distribute
game state management across a scalable, distributed setup.
? Redis: Stores real-time data (positions, maze data), auto-
expiry for transient values.
? MongoDB: Stores scores, history.
3.3 Fault Tolerance and Error Handling
Describes what happens when something goes wrong:
? If a player disconnects, their state is stored in Redis and
restored on reconnect.
? If a server fails, players are redirected to another server in
the cluster.
? If Redis crashes, real-time data is lost, but persistent data in
MongoDB remains.
3.4 Limitations
Some features are not fully implemented or partially working:
? Currently there is no implementation of dynamically multi-
plying servers to handle load. We depend on the sharding of
the infinite mazes to spread out the load across servers, but
this will not hold up if a large amount of players decide to
meet up in a single maze. Replication can be implemented
to fix this.
? Currently there is only one server cluster (one region), but
this is currently being implemented, and with replication of
Redis and hopefully will be implemented before the demon-
stration.
? It is ran locally and therefore two players can not move at
the same time as the same movement keys on the keyboard
are used for all game instances i.e. you would need to have
multiple keyboards (or multiple devices) to control multiple
players at once.
? All the ghosts currently respawn if one ghost loses all three
lives rather than waiting until all four are dead, but this is
currently being implemented and hopefully will be imple-
mented before the demonstration.
3.5 Distributed Techniques
Process Replication : Multiple game servers (e.g., game-server-0,
game-server-1) each handle a different part of the maze. This helps
balance the load and makes the system more fault-tolerant.
? Degree of Isolation: Each server manages a different maze
section, so failures are isolated and don?t impact the whole
system.
? Degree of Replication : Each server replicates its local
game state in real time using Redis, but full replication across
all servers is not used.
--- PAGE 3 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N ? 3
? Level of Replica Consistency : Eventual consistency is
acceptable since each server manages separate parts of the
maze.
? Assumption about Fault Tolerance: The system redirects
players from failed servers to available ones to ensure con-
tinued gameplay.
? Assumption about failure model : It assumes temporary
server failures that can be handled by other servers taking
over the load.
Partitioning : The maze is split into sections, with each server
managing a number of mazes. Players are assigned to servers based
on where they are in the maze, and new servers can be added to
support more players or mazes. This is the formula we use for
sharding the mazes across servers,
?????? ?? = (????? + ????? ) mod ????????????
.
? Degree of Isolation: Partitioning gives each server control
over a specific maze section, limiting the impact of failures.
? Assumption about Fault Tolerance: Players can be redi-
rected if a server fails, ensuring other sections remain unaf-
fected.
? Assumption about failure model : Server-level failures
are expected and handled by re-routing players to a different
sever and maze without disrupting gameplay.
Caching : Redis stores game data such as player, ghost and dot
positions, in memory for quick read and write operations. This
reduces the reliance on the slower MongoDB database which is
used to store less real-time critical data such as the leader-board.
? Degree of Isolation : Caching is isolated per server clus-
ter, allowing independent in-memory management of game
data.
? Degree of Replication: Redis replicates data in real time
across clusters to keep memory state consistent.
? Level of Replica Consistency : Redis uses eventual consis-
tency, which is acceptable as this is a game.
? Assumption Fault Tolerance: Redis failures may result in
data loss.
? Assumption about failure model : Redis may crash.
Load Balancing : Players are distributed across different servers to
make sure no single server gets overloaded.
? Degree of Isolation: Load balancing spreads players across
servers, ensuring that one server?s failure doesn?t affect the
entire system.
? Assumption about Fault Tolerance: Overloaded servers
trigger new servers to spin up which will and redistribution
of the mazes across the servers, as well as the players within
them, helping the system handle high loads gracefully.
? Assumption about failure model : The system assumes
overloaded servers may fail and adjusts assignments to main-
tain gameplay.
Checkpointing/Message Logging : Redis keeps the game state
synced in real-time. The NetworkManager logs important game
events to help recover the game state if anything goes wrong.
? Degree of Isolation : Each server maintains and logs its
own state, allowing isolated recovery without disrupting
the whole system.
? Degree of Replication: Game state is replicated in Redis
for real-time use.
? Level of Replica Consistency : Checkpointing supports
strong consistency by enabling recovery of accurate game
state from backups.
? Assumption about failure model : The system expects
possible server or Redis failures and uses persistent logging
to recover lost state.
Replication : Redis replicates data across server clusters to make
sure players can play together in real-time, no matter where they
are in the world.
? Degree of Isolation: Redis clusters replicate data internally,
isolating failure impact and ensuring local redundancy.
? Assumption about Fault Tolerance: Redis ensures data
availability even if one replica fails, maintaining seamless
game continuity.
? Assumption about failure model: The system anticipates
server or network failures and relies on Redis replication to
preserve availability and data integrity.
3.6 API Descriptions
WebSocket API : This enables real-time communication between
the client and server for syncing game state and player actions. It
allows the server to send updates to the client and lets clients send
their movements back to the server.
Canvas API : Used on the client-side to render game elements like
walls and dots on the maze. It provides functions for drawing images
and shapes on the canvas to represent the game visually.
MongoDB API : Used to save player data, scores, and game state.
MongoDB handles long-term storage, like player profiles and game
history, and Mongoose makes it easier to query and save this data.
Redis API : Handles real-time server-to-server communication by
publishing and subscribing to game events. Redis ensures that game
state updates, like player positions and maze changes, stay synced
across multiple servers.
4 ARCHITECTURE
4.1 Overview
The system follows a distributed architecture, separating client-
side rendering, server-side logic, and backend storage. It consists
of game clients, game server instances, Redis for real-time state
synchronisation, and MongoDB for long-term persistence.
4.2 Technical Stack
Frontend: React-based frontend with WebSocket communication
Backend: Node.js servers with Express and WebSocket
--- PAGE 4 ---
4 ?
Database: MongoDB for persistence, Redis for caching
Containerisation: Docker-based deployment using docker-compose
4.3 Technical Architecture
This section outlines the components of the application and their
functionalities.
4.3.1 Client-Side Components. :
The client-side handles rendering the game and managing player
interactions.
Distributed Visualisation : Renders the distributed table, showing
the player id, maze coordinates, server, player count, and connection
status. It retrieves the information from the server.
Ghost Manager : Sets the ghosts starting position on the client
side along with the ghosts speed. It also keeps track of the moving
direction, controls ghost lives, sets how often the ghost direction is
changed, and manages the blinking effect when the ghost is about
to expire.
Game Logic : Integrates various game components, including Pac-
man, ghosts, networking, distributed visualisation, and leaderboard
functionality.
Leaderboard UI : Creates and manages a dynamic, auto-refreshing
leader board UI for a game, fetching and displaying player scores in
real-time from a server.
Maze Manager : Controls the maze layout and structure, entity
placement, maze transitions and wall image toggling, dot and power-
up consumption tracking, dropper management and effects, maze
coordinates and server switching, and canvas drawing for all game
elements.
Moving Direction : Maps four movement directions (right, down,
left, up) to their respective numeric values (0 to 3) and exports it for
use in other parts of a program.
Network Manager : Controls managing WebSocket connections,
sending/receiving player movements and actions, synchronising
game state, handling maze transitions between servers, managing
player connections and disconnections, and coordinating multi-
player interactions.
Player Manager : Controls the player, handling movement, ani-
mation, interactions with the maze (dots, power dots, and ghosts),
player lives, and networked game state updates for multiplayer
gameplay.
4.3.2 Backend Components. :
The server-side is responsible for managing game state and ensuring
synchronisation between players.
Game Server : manages the WebSocket server setup and handles
player connections. It integrates Redis game state persistence across
servers and maintain state in the case of server crashes. MongoDB
is used to store the game?s scoreboard as this isn?t updated as often.
The server coordinates maze management, player state synchroni-
sation, and ghost behaviour. It also ensures game state persistence
and recovery, while handling the overall multiplayer game logic.
Server : Three local Docker-based servers handle player requests
and game state management in a distributed setup.
4.3.3 Shared Services. These services provide real-time and persis-
tent data storage and synchronisation.
MongoDB : Used for long term storage, it stores, player profiles,
player scores, game history and persistent game data. MongoDB is
used for long term data.
Redis : Manages and tracks game states, such as player positions,
Ghost positions, Dropper positions, consumed dots, maze metadata
and power dots, across multiple servers. Redis will expire after set
times (e.g. 1 hour for players, 24 hours for dots)and is used for
real-time updates.
4.4 Architectural Diagram
Clients connect via WebSocket to the game server, with bi-directional
communication for real-time updates. Game servers read/write
player positions, ghost locations, maze transitions to Redis, and
scores/leaderboards to MongoDB, as illustrated in Figure 1. Figure
2 shows the scaling of server clusters by region (EU, Asia) with
replicated Redis databases to enable cross-region gameplay.
Fig. 1. Diagram of the Pacman client-server architecture.
Fig. 2. Diagram of the Pacman backend architecture.
--- PAGE 5 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N ? 5
5 IMPLEMENTATION
Fig. 3. Diagram of the overall Operation.
Overall Operation : Figure 3 shows the general flow of gameplay.
? Client connects to game server via WebSocket.
? Server assigns player to a maze (Redis handles which maze
is active).
? Game loop updates player/ghost positions and syncs with
Redis 20x/sec.
? State changes trigger updates to the Redis database.
5.1 Flow Diagrams
This section outlines the key flow diagrams.
Fig. 4. Player joining game flow.
Fig. 5. Player collecting dot and score updating flow.
Fig. 6. Maze Transition Flow.
Fig. 7. Server Failure and Player Reconnection Flow.
5.2 Failure Handling
? Player Disconnect
? Redis stores position, direction, and score.
? On reconnect, server assigns player to correct maze
from Redis.
? Game resumes seamlessly.
--- PAGE 6 ---
6 ?
? Server Crash
? Players move to another server. Redis ensures state is
restored.
? Redis Failure
? Real-time data is lost.
? Game state cannot be fully restored (acknowledged in
limitations)
? MongoDB still stores scores.
? Network Failure
? Since it is ran locally nothing changes. The followng
points descibe what would happen if it was deployed.
? Players temporarily freeze.
? Upon reconnection, synce from Redis
5.3 Tools and Libraries
? Node.js, Express, WebSockets. These technologies form the
core of the backend server infrastructure:
? Node.js provides the runtime environment for running
JavaScript on the server side. It?s event-driven and
non-blocking, making it ideal for real-time multiplayer
games.
? Express is a lightweight web application framework for
Node.js. It?s used to define REST endpoints and serve
static assets like the client-side game files.
? WebSockets enable real-time, bi-directional communi-
cation between clients (players) and the game server.
This allows player actions (like movement) and game
events (like dot collection or ghost movement) to be
synchronised instantly across all connected clients.
? Redis, MongoDB. These are the two main databases used in
the system, each serving a different purpose:
? Redis is an in-memory data store used for real-time,
transient game data. It holds player positions, ghost
states, dot placements, and maze metadata.
? MongoDB is a NoSQL document database used for per-
sistent storage. It stores long-term data such as player
profiles, and scores.
? Game loop logic (e.g., setInterval at 50ms). The game uses
a loop that updates the game state approximately every 50
milliseconds (which is 20 times per second). This is imple-
mented using JavaScript?s setInterval function. This loop is
responsible for:
? Updating player and ghost positions.
? Checking for collisions (e.g., with dots or ghosts).
? Broadcasting updated state to all connected players.
A 50ms interval provides a smooth gameplay experience
while keeping CPU and network usage manageable.
5.4 API Examples
Listing 1. WebSocket API
class NetworkManager {
constructor () {
this . socket = new WebSocket ( ' ws :// game - server
') ;
// Event handlers
this . socket . onmessage = ( event ) = > {
const data = JSON . parse ( event . data ) ;
this . handleMessage ( data ) ;
};
this . socket . onclose = () = > {
console . log ( ' Connection closed ') ;
};
}
// Send movement
sendMove ( data ) {
this . socket . send ( JSON . stringify ({
type : 'move ',
playerId : this . playerId ,
x : data .x ,
y : data . y
}) ) ;
}
}
The WebSocket API in Listing 1 creates a connection to a game server
using the URL ws://game-server. It listens for incoming messages
from the server and processes them by parsing the data and passing
it to the handleMessage method. Additionally, the sendMove method
sends a player?s movement data (including x and y coordinates) to
the server in a JSON format whenever called.
Listing 2. Canvas API
class MazeManager {
constructor ( canvas ) {
this . canvas = canvas ;
this . ctx = canvas . getContext ( '2d ') ;
}
drawMaze () {
// Draw walls
this . walls . forEach ( wall = > {
this . ctx . drawImage ( this . wallImage , wall .x ,
wall . y ) ;
}) ;
// Draw dots
this . dots . forEach ( dot = > {
if ( dot . active ) {
this . ctx . fillStyle = ' yellow ';
this . ctx . beginPath () ;
this . ctx . arc ( dot .x , dot .y , 3 , 0 , Math . PI *
2) ;
this . ctx . fill () ;
}
}) ;
}
}
In this Listing 2, the canvas api is used to render walls and active
dots in a maze by drawing them on the 2D canvas context (this.ctx).
Listing 3. MongoDB API
const mongoose = require ( ' mongoose ') ;
--- PAGE 7 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N ? 7
const scoreSchema = new mongoose . Schema ({
playerId : { type : String , required : true } ,
playerName : { type : String , default : ' Anonymous '
} ,
score : { type : Number , required : true } ,
date : { type : Date , default : Date . now }
}) ;
scoreSchema . index ({ score : -1 }) ;
const Score = mongoose . model ( ' Score ', scoreSchema )
;
module . exports = Score ;
}
This Listing 3 defines a Mongoose schema for a Score model, which
includes fields for playerId, playerName, score, and date. It also
creates an index on the score field to allow efficient querying of
scores in descending order and exports the Score model for use in
other parts of the application.
Listing 4. Redis API
// Redis setup
const Redis = require ( ' ioredis ') ;
require ( ' dotenv ') . config () ;
let redisClient = null ;
const connectRedis = async () = > {
try {
const redisUri = process . env . REDIS_URI || '
redis :// localhost :6379 ';
redisClient = new Redis ( redisUri ) ;
await redisClient . ping () ;
console . log ( ` Redis Connected : $ { redisUri } `) ;
return redisClient ;
} catch ( error ) {
console . error ( ` Error connecting to Redis : $ {
error . message } `) ;
process . exit (1) ;
}
};
// Redis in action
const mazeData = await redisService .
getOrCreateMaze (x , y ) ;
const consumedDots = await redisService .
getConsumedDots (x , y ) ;
const playersInMaze = await redisService .
getP layersInM aze (x , y ) ;
await redisService . setPlayer ( playerId , {
id : playerId ,
x : data .x ,
y : data .y ,
direction : data . direction ,
score : player . score || 0 ,
lives : player . lives || 3
}) ;
This Listing 4 sets up a Redis client using the ioredis library to
connect to a Redis instance, either from a URI specified in the en-
vironment variables or by default to localhost:6379. It defines a
connectRedis function to establish the connection and perform a
ping check, and later uses Redis to store and retrieve game-related
data such as maze data, consumed dots, and player information.
5.5 Game Screens
This section displays some of the key functionality in our applica-
tion.
Fig. 8. Pacman eats dots and they disappear for all players
Fig. 9. The ghosts are synchronised across players within the maze.
Fig. 10. When a player eats a power-up, the ghost becomes scared for that
player.
--- PAGE 8 ---
8 ?
Fig. 11. Player and ghosts have 3 lives initially.
Fig. 12. Player loses life when it collides with a ghost.
Fig. 13. When a player has 0 lives left, the game will display a game over
message.
Fig. 14. Players can see each other, when playing the game and they can
see when a player is leaving.
Fig. 15. The dropper will randomly replenish dots in areas where they have
been eaten.
Fig. 16. Different mazes have different coloured walls to simply show the
transition of mazes, maze(0,0) and maze(0, 1)
--- PAGE 9 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N ? 9
Fig. 17. Each player will see the distributed board which will show player
id, current maze, the server they are on, the amount of players in the maze,
the status of their connection, and the mazes around the current mazes
with the servers they are on.
Fig. 18. Each player will see the leaderboard which will show the top 10
scores from themselves of different players. Since this is being ran locally
this was two different instances of playing the game with two different IP
Addresses.
6 TESTING
6.1 Functional Requirements
? We implemented a script that will automatically pull docker
files and start docker images for the backend and leader
board. We tested the script works for setting up the envi-
ronment fully for easier deployment on all the machines.
The Figure below shows that docker containers are pulled
automatically by running the script.
Fig. 19. auto-pull docker containers
? The single player is tested with eating dots and hit a ghost.
When a dot is eaten, the dot should disappear and when the
player hit a ghost, the player should die.
? The multiple player is tested by opening a new window. The
other player in the original window should see the position
of the other player is updated. When a player quites the
game, the player should disappear from other?s view.
? When the players moves out of the current maze, it will
enter a new maze and the dot setup will be updated for a
new maze. The look of the maze is updated as well.
? The leader board is tested by ending the game for both
players and see if the high scores are updated. The leader
board will only keep 10 highest scores.
Additional unit tests were defined to validate some other functional
requirements. Using mocked data, these tests were created to con-
firm that core game features behave as expected.
The primary component under test within this section was the
MazeManager, which orchestrates game state and transitions. All of
these tests were implemented using Jest with fake timers to simulate
time-based events (e.g., power dot expiration, ghost and dropper
lifetimes).
Starting with player and enemy interactions, the tests confirm that
Pacman loses a life upon colliding with a ghost unless a power
dot is active. This is validated by simulating direct collisions in
both powered and unpowered states, ensuring that the game?s life
management logic behaves correctly. Additionally, a separate test
confirms that the game ends when Pacman?s lives reach zero.
Dot collection and score tracking are also tested. Pacman?s score
correctly increases by 10 points when a standard dot is eaten and
by 50 points when a power dot is consumed. Both types of dots are
marked as consumed within the internal maze state, ensuring that
the system accurately tracks which tiles have been cleared by the
player.
Power dot effects are tested using a series of timing-based tests.
These confirm that power dot activation triggers a temporary invin-
cibility window, during which Pacman can eat ghosts without losing
lives. The expiration of the power-up after its designated duration
--- PAGE 10 ---
10 ?
is tested using mocked timers, and an additional test ensures that
consuming a second power dot resets the timer appropriately.
Ghosts and droppers are tested for both lifecycle behaviour and
grouping logic. Ghosts are created in batches of four, each with a
shared batch ID, and can be removed in full by their batch identifier.
The test suite confirms that ghosts expire after a fixed lifespan of 120
seconds, as designed. Similarly, droppers are created with specific
coordinates and lifetimes, and are removed when they expire.
The test suite confirms that the maze transitions correctly when
the player moves to a new sector, and that the grid resets to an
empty state during the transition. It also verifies tile validation
logic, confirming that Pacman cannot move through walls and that
out-of-bounds movement is correctly restricted.
6.2 Non-Functional Requirements Testing Through Load
Simulation
Fig. 20. Load Testing by Simulating Players
The load test simulates 5,000 concurrent players interacting with the
game world, distributed geographically and logically across a 500 ?
500 maze grid. The system is evaluated based on round-trip latency,
CPU usage, server distribution, and message handling efficiency.
The simulation is implemented by creating thousands of WebSocket
clients representing individual players. Each client connects to a
server using the same load balancing technique as the game.
These clients track round-trip time (RTT) using timestamped mes-
sages.
The averaged RTT for a simulation with 5000 players was 342ms.
This is a generally acceptable range for real-time games (ideally it
would be <200ms). Players may perceive movement lag or delays in
state updates, especially in the cases where they are transitioning
between maze sectors or interacting with ghosts or power dots. The
root cause for this is suspected to be the high client-serve message
volume.
Server Distribution: For 5000 players across 3 servers, the distribu-
tion was as follows:
? Server 1 - 1502 Players (30%)
? Server 2 - 1471 Players (29%)
? Server 3 - 2027 Players (41%)
The distribution is reasonably balanced, with server 3 carrying a
slightly higher proportion of players.
Maze Distribution for the top 5 mazes
? Maze (349, 271) - 3 Players
? Maze (199, 184) - 2 Players
? Maze (25, 469) - 2 Players
? Maze (197, 80) - 2 Players
? Maze (415, 227) - 2 Players
The players were randomised across mazes to showcase the large-
scale functionality of the maze system.
7 SUMMARY
This project has implemented a distributed multiplayer Pacman
game that supports real-time synchronisation, scalable server de-
ployment, and persistent scoring. We developed a system architec-
ture that incorporates WebSockets for real-time communication,
Redis for fast in-memory data handling, and MongoDB for long-
term persistence. Players can interact across maze instances, with
dynamic transitions, synchronised ghost behaviour, and shared dot
collection logic.
Key achievements include a fully working multiplayer system with
coordinated player movement, live leaderboard updates, maze sector
transitions, and dropper functionality. We implemented a distributed
maze management system that partitions maze sectors across mul-
tiple Docker-based server instances, improving scalability and fault
isolation.
8 ALLOCATION OF WORK
See following page.
--- PAGE 11 ---
Pacman Final Report Group N ? 11
Team Members Task
Sheena and Zemyna Frontend Implementation
Thomas Server Architecture and Multiplayer Functionality
Wen Geng MongoDB Functionality
Complete Team System Architecture Design
Thomas Redis Chaching
Wen Geng Dropper Implementation
Yongjia Leader board Implementation and help with functional testing
Zemyna, Sheena, Thomas, and Wen Geng Pair programming for error identification
Zemyna Functional and Non-Functional Testing and Testing final report write up
Zemyna, Sheena and Thomas Interim Reports
Sheena Final Report
Complete Team Bug Fixing